Project loom post (#1248)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-08-24-state-of-project-loom.md

> ---

Reviewer: Don't forget to change the date. Also, you might want to add "java" to the URL. Here are the keyword results from Keyword Planner:

- project loom: 3600
- java project loom: 720
- java loom: 100

This suggests that "java" doesn't need to go in the URL.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, I always forget the URL :facepalm:

layout: blog_post

> title: "What the Heck Is Java Project Loom?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "What the Heck Is Project Loom for Java?"
```

This title doesn't look quite right, so I tried some others on https://blog-title-analyzer.oktadev.dev/.

- What the Heck Is Project Loom for Java? 69
- What the Heck Is Java's Project Loom? 67

For this reason, I think the former is better.

@havi I thought `Is` should NOT be capitalized, but http://www.conissaunce.com/pages/infoq-title-case.html thinks it should be.

author: deepu-sasidharan
by: advocate
communities: [java]

> description: "What the heck is Java Project Loom and what does it mean for average Java developers?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "What the heck is Java's Project Loom and what does it mean for average Java developers?"
```

I'm not sure using "average" is an inclusive term. Maybe "everyday" or "regular" would be better? Or just remove it.

tags: [java, concurrency, project-loom]
tweets:
  - "What the heck is #Java Project Loom and what does it mean for average Java developers?"

>   - "What is the hottest new thing in #Java? Learn all about Virtual threads and Project Loom"

Reviewer: Adjust based on title and descriptions above.

> image:

Reviewer: Need to add a social image here.

type: awareness
---

> Java has good multi-threading and concurrency capabilities from early on in its evolution and could effectively utilize multi-threaded and multi-core CPUs. JDK 1.1 had basic support for platform threads (or Operating System (OS) threads), and JDK 1.5 had more utilities and updates to improve concurrency and multi-threading. JDK 8 brought asynchronous programming support and more concurrency improvements. While things improved over multiple versions, there was nothing groundbreaking apart from support for concurrency and multi-threading using OS threads for the last three decades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java has good multi-threading and concurrency capabilities from early on in its evolution and can effectively utilize multi-threaded and multi-core CPUs. JDK 1.1 had basic support for platform threads (or Operating System (OS) threads), and JDK 1.5 had more utilities and updates to improve concurrency and multi-threading. JDK 8 brought asynchronous programming support and more concurrency improvements. While things improved over multiple versions, there was nothing groundbreaking apart from support for concurrency and multi-threading using OS threads for the last three decades.
```

> Though the concurrency model in Java was powerful and flexible as a feature, it was not the easiest to use, and the developer experience was not that great. This was primarily due to the shared state concurrency model used by default. One has to resort to synchronizing threads to avoid issues like data races and thread blocking. I wrote more about Java concurrency in my [Concurrency in modern programming languages: Java](https://deepu.tech/concurrency-in-modern-languages-java/) post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though the concurrency model in Java is powerful and flexible as a feature, it was not the easiest to use, and the developer experience hasn't been great. This is primarily due to the shared state concurrency model used by default. One has to resort to synchronizing threads to avoid issues like data races and thread blocking. I wrote more about Java concurrency in my [Concurrency in modern programming languages: Java](https://deepu.tech/concurrency-in-modern-languages-java/) post.
```

> ## What is Project Loom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is Project Loom?
```

> Project Loom aims to drastically reduce the effort of writing, maintaining, and observing high-throughput concurrent applications that make the best use of available hardware.
>
> — Ron Pressler (Tech lead, Project Loom)

> OS threads are at the core of Java's concurrency model and have a very mature ecosystem around them, but it also comes with some drawbacks and is expensive computationally. Let's look at the two most common use cases for concurrency and the drawbacks of the current Java concurrency model in these cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OS threads are at the core of Java's concurrency model and have a very mature ecosystem around them, but they also come with some drawbacks and are expensive computationally. Let's look at the two most common use cases for concurrency and the drawbacks of the current Java concurrency model in these cases.
```

So in a thread-per-request model, the throughput will be limited by the number of OS threads available, which depends on the number of physical cores/threads available on the hardware. To work around this, you have to use shared thread pools or asynchronous concurrency, both of which have their drawbacks. Thread pools have many limitations, like thread leaking, deadlocks, resource thrashing, etc. Asynchronous concurrency means you must adapt to a more complex programming style and handle data races carefully. There are also chances of memory leaks, thread locking, etc.

Another common use case is parallel processing or multi-threading. You must ensure thread synchronization when executing a parallel task distributed over multiple threads to avoid data races. The implementation becomes even more fragile and puts a lot more responsibility on the developer to ensure there are no issues like thread leaks and cancellation delays.

> Project Loom aims to fix these issues in the current concurrency model by introducing two new features, virtual threads, and structured concurrency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Project Loom aims to fix these issues in the current concurrency model by introducing two new features: virtual threads and structured concurrency.
```

### Virtual Threads

> > Java 19 is scheduled to be released in September 2022, and Virtual threads will be a preview feature. Yayyy!

Reviewer: You might want to add a reminder to your calendar to update this post when Java 19 is released, then repromote.

[Virtual threads](https://openjdk.org/jeps/425) are lightweight threads that are not tied to OS threads but are managed by the JVM. They are suitable for thread-per-request programming styles without having the limitations of OS threads. You can create millions of virtual threads without affecting throughput. This is quite similar to coroutines, like [Goroutines](https://go.dev/tour/concurrency/1), made famous by the Go programming language.

> The new virtual threads in java 19 will be pretty easy to use. Compare the below with Golang's Goroutines or Kotlin's coroutines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new virtual threads in Java 19 will be pretty easy to use. Compare the below with Golang's Goroutines or Kotlin's coroutines.
```

**Virtual thread**

```java
Thread.startVirtualThread(() -> {
    System.out.println("Hello, Project Loom!");
});
```

**Goroutine**

```go
go func() {
    println("Hello, Goroutines!")
}()
```

**Kotlin coroutine**

```kotlin
runBlocking {
    launch {
        println("Hello, Kotlin coroutines!")
    }
}
```

> A fun fact is that before Java 1.1, Java had support for green threads (a.k.a virtual threads). The new implementation of virtual threads is done in the JVM, where it maps multiple virtual threads to one or more OS threads, and the developer can use virtual threads or platform threads as per their needs. A few other important aspects of virtual threads are:

Reviewer: should this be "before Java 1.1" or "since"?

Author: before. I'll make it clearer

- They are a `Thread` in code, runtime, debugger, and profiler
- It's a Java entity and not a wrapper around a native thread
- Creating and blocking them are cheap operations
- They should not be pooled
- It uses a work-stealing `ForkJoinPool` scheduler
- Pluggable schedulers can be used for asynchronous programming
- Virtual thread will have its own stack memory
- API is very similar to OS threads and hence easier to adopt/migrate

Let's look at some examples to show how powerful virtual threads are.

#### Total number of threads

> First, let's see how many platform threads vs. virtual threads we can create on a machine (My machine is Intel Core i9-11900H, 8 cores, 16 threads, and 64GB RAM).

Reviewer: Does OS matter? If so, you might want to mention it here.

Author: Ya could matter a bit

**Platform threads**

```java
var counter = new AtomicInteger();
while (true) {
    new Thread(() -> {
        int count = counter.incrementAndGet();
        System.out.println("Thread count = " + count);
        LockSupport.park();
    }).start();
}
```

On my machine, the code crashed after **32_539** platform threads.

**Virtual threads**

```java
var counter = new AtomicInteger();
while (true) {
    Thread.startVirtualThread(() -> {
        int count = counter.incrementAndGet();
        System.out.println("Thread count = " + count);
        LockSupport.park();
    });
}
```

> On my machine, the process hanged after **14_625_956** virtual threads but didn't crash, and as memory became available, it kept going slowly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On my machine, the process hung after **14_625_956** virtual threads but didn't crash, and as memory became available, it kept going slowly.
```

#### Task throughput

Let's try to run 100,000 tasks using platform threads.

```java
try (var executor = Executors.newThreadPerTaskExecutor(Executors.defaultThreadFactory())) {
    IntStream.range(0, 100_000).forEach(i -> executor.submit(() -> {
        Thread.sleep(Duration.ofSeconds(1));
        System.out.println(i);
        return i;
    }));
}
```

> This uses the `newThreadPerTaskExecutor` with the default thread factory and thus uses a thread group. If we run this code and time it, we get the below numbers. We get better performance if we use a thread pool with `Executors.newCachedThreadPool()`.

Reviewer: This might read better as "I" vs "we". 

> When I ran this code and timed it, I get the below numbers. I get better performance if I use a thread pool with `Executors.newCachedThreadPool()`.

```bash
# 'newThreadPerTaskExecutor' with 'defaultThreadFactory'
0:18.77 real,   18.15 s user,   7.19 s sys,     135% 3891pu,    0 amem,         743584 mmem
# 'newCachedThreadPool' with 'defaultThreadFactory'
0:11.52 real,   13.21 s user,   4.91 s sys,     157% 6019pu,    0 amem,         2215972 mmem
```

Not so bad. Now, let's do the same using virtual threads.

```java
try (var executor = Executors.newVirtualThreadPerTaskExecutor()) {
    IntStream.range(0, 100_000).forEach(i -> executor.submit(() -> {
        Thread.sleep(Duration.ofSeconds(1));
        System.out.println(i);
        return i;
    }));
}
```

> If we run and time it, we get the below numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If I run and time it, I get the below numbers.
```

Reviewer: To match above if you decide to change it.

```bash
0:02.62 real,   6.83 s user,    1.46 s sys,     316% 14840pu,   0 amem,         350268 mmem
```

This is far more performant than using platform threads with thread pools. Of course, these are simple use cases; both thread pools and virtual thread implementations can be further optimized for better performance, but that's not the point of this post.

> Running JMH benchmarks with the same code gives the below results, and you can see that virtual threads outperform platform threads by a huge margin.

Reviewer: Might want to define JMH

```bash
# Throughput
Benchmark                             Mode  Cnt  Score   Error  Units
LoomBenchmark.platformThreadPerTask  thrpt    5  0.362 ± 0.079  ops/s
LoomBenchmark.platformThreadPool     thrpt    5  0.528 ± 0.067  ops/s
LoomBenchmark.virtualThreadPerTask   thrpt    5  1.843 ± 0.093  ops/s

# Average time
Benchmark                             Mode  Cnt  Score   Error  Units
LoomBenchmark.platformThreadPerTask   avgt    5  5.600 ± 0.768   s/op
LoomBenchmark.platformThreadPool      avgt    5  3.887 ± 0.717   s/op
LoomBenchmark.virtualThreadPerTask    avgt    5  1.098 ± 0.020   s/op
```

You can find the benchmark [source code on GitHub](https://github.com/deepu105/java-loom-benchmarks). Here are some other meaningful benchmarks for virtual threads:

> - An interesting benchmark using ApacheBench [on GitHub](https://github.com/ebarlas/project-loom-comparison)

Reviewer: You might want to credit the author here.

- If the thread executing `handleOrder()` is interrupted, the interruption is not propagated to the subtasks. In this case `updateInventory()` and `updateOrder()` will leak and continue to run in the background.

For these situations, we would have to carefully write workarounds and failsafe, putting all the burden on the developer.

We can achieve the same functionality with structured concurrency using the code below.

```java
void handleOrder() throws ExecutionException, InterruptedException {
    try (var scope = new StructuredTaskScope.ShutdownOnFailure()) {
        Future<Integer> inventory = scope.fork(() -> updateInventory());
        Future<Integer> order = scope.fork(() -> updateOrder());

        scope.join();           // Join both forks
        scope.throwIfFailed();  // ... and propagate errors

        // Here, both forks have succeeded, so compose their results
        System.out.println("Inventory " + inventory.resultNow() + " updated for order " + order.resultNow());
    }
}
```

> Unlike the previous sample using `ExecutorService`, we can now use `StructuredTaskScope` to achieve the same result while confining the lifetimes of the subtasks to the lexical scope, in this case, the body of the `try-with-resources` statement. The code is much more readable, and the intent is also clear. `StructuredTaskScope` also ensures the below behavior automatically

Reviewer: I'm not sure if try-with-resources should be surrounded with backticks. In Oracle's docs, it looks like only `try` is surrounded. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/exceptions/tryResourceClose.html

- **Error handling with short-circuiting** — If either the `updateInventory()` or `updateOrder()` fails, the other is cancelled unless its already completed. This is managed by the cancellation policy implemented by `ShutdownOnFailure()`; other policies are possible.

- **Cancellation propagation** — If the thread running `handleOrder()` is interrupted before or during the call to `join()`, both forks are canceled automatically when the thread exits the scope.

- **Observability** — A thread dump would clearly display the task hierarchy, with the threads running `updateInventory()` and `updateOrder()` shown as children of the scope.

## State of Project Loom

> The project started in 2017 and has undergone many changes and proposals. Virtual threads were initially called fibers, but later on, it was renamed to avoid confusion. Today with Java 19 getting closer to release, the project has delivered two features discussed above. One as a preview and another as an incubator. Hence the path to stabilization of the features should be more precise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Loom project started in 2017 and has undergone many changes and proposals. Virtual threads were initially called fibers, but later on, they were renamed to avoid confusion. Today with Java 19 getting closer to release, the project has delivered two features discussed above. One as a preview and another as an incubator. Hence the path to stabilization of the features should be more precise.
```

## What does this mean to average Java developers?

> 

Reviewer: Again, not sure if average is the best term here.

Author: i'll change to regular

> When these features are production ready, it should not affect average Java developers much, as most java developers might be using libraries for most of the concurrency use cases. But it can be a big deal in those rare scenarios where you are doing a lot of multi-threading or parallel programming without using libraries. Virtual threads will increase performance and scalability in most cases, and structured concurrency can help simplify the codebase and make it less fragile and maintainable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When these features are production ready, it should not affect average Java developers much, as most Java developers might be using libraries for most of the concurrency use cases. But it can be a big deal in those rare scenarios where you are doing a lot of multi-threading or parallel programming without using libraries. Virtual threads will increase performance and scalability in most cases, and structured concurrency can help simplify the codebase and make it less fragile and maintainable.
```

## What does this mean to Java library developers?

> When these features are production ready, it will be a big deal for libraries and frameworks that use threads or parallelism. Library authors will see huge performance and scalability improvements while simplifying the codebase and making it maintainable. Web frameworks like Spring and Micronaut can switch to virtual threads to improve throughput further. I would expect most web frameworks and libraries to migrate to virtual threads from thread pools and the trendy reactive programming libraries like RxJava and Akka might be able to use structured concurrency effectively.

Reviewer: What about foundational technologies like Tomcat? 

You might want to mention there will still be bottlenecks with blocking libraries like JDBC drivers. There will still be a need for reactive technologies that are non-blocking if you want maximum throughput.

Author: Ya true, but I would also expect the JDBC libs and frameworks also to adapt virtual threads were applicable but yes there will be use cases for reactive out there
